WinTrans version 1.0 Documentation

Description:

WinTrans is a windows interface to the NfbTrans program.  Its purpose is to allow windows users to translate text files to grade II braille and grade II braille files to text without dealing with the dos environment in which NfbTrans runs.

Installation:

Installation is simple.  Just place the wintrans.exe and wintrans.ini files in the same folder as NfbTrans.exe.  For purposes of these examples, we will assume you got Wintrans as part of the bt.exe archive and that you installed the whole thing to the default, c:\bt\.

To start the program press Windows+R to bring up the run dialog.  Enter: c:\bt\wintrans.exe.  You can also set up a desktop shortcut and click that instead of using the run dialog.  Consult your windows documentation to learn how to set up a shortcut.

Overview:

The main dialog contains a series of buttons and a set of radio buttons.  Each one has a corresponding hot key so you can quickly and easily move to the item you want.  They are:
Input ALT+I
Output ALT+O
braille to text ALT+B
Text to braille ALT+T
Translate ALT+R
Emboss ALT+E
Volumes ALT+V
Preferences ALT+P
Stats ALT+S
Exit ALT+X

You can use the hot keys to quickly and easily move to any desired item.

Translating Files:

Tab to the input button and press enter or press ALT+I.  The input file dialog appears.  Type or browse to the name of your input file and press enter.  If the file is not in the \bt folder, you will have to include the path.  If the file does not exist, you are so informed and you are given another chance to enter a file name.

Tab to the output button and press enter or press ALT+O.  The output file dialog appears.  Type an output file name and press enter.You will be prompted if you are about to overwrite an existing file.  If this happens, press y to overwrite the file or n for another chance to enter a new file name.

The output file is optional.  If you leave it blank, WinTrans will use the name and path of the input file with the appropriate extension.  If the input file is myfile.brf and you leave the output file blank, the translation will be written to myfile.txt.  Similarly, if the input file is myfile.txt and you leave the output file blank, the translation will be written to myfile.brf.

Tab to the translation mode radio buttons.  Use the arrow keys to check the box you want.  The choices are braille to text and text to braille.  You can also check braille to text by pressing ALT+B or text to braille by pressing ALT+T.

Tab to the translate button and press enter or press ALT+R.  The word 'Translating' appears on the status line.  When translation is complete, a message box appears reporting success or failure.

The translate button also notifies you of various entry errors such as entering an input file with a .txt extension and checking the braille to text check box.

Embossing Files:

If you have an embosser, WinTrans allows you to take advantage of NfbTrans's embossing capabilities.  Tab to the input button and press enter or press ALT+I.  The input file dialog appears.  Type or browse to the name of your input file and press enter.  If the file is not in the \bt folder, you will have to include the path.  If the file does not exist, you are so informed and you are given another chance to enter a file name.

You must give your file a .brf extension.  If you happen to have a braille file with another extension, rename it before embossing.  If you enter a file with a .txt extension, the file is translated and then embossed.
to the main dialog.

Tab to the emboss button and press enter or press ALT+E.  Be sure your embosser is online, powered up and loaded with paper before clicking this button.

Multiple Volumes:

To handle multiple braille volumes, tab to the volumes button and press enter or press ALT+V.  You are prompted for a volume spec.  Enter the path to the files and enough of the name to get them all without excluding any.  Let's say we want to translate a 4-volume book.  It's in a folder called c:\good books.  The files are good book v01.brl, good book v02.brl and so on.  Our volume spec might be: 
c:\good books\good book.

A message box appears.  Press y to combine output into one file or n to produce separate text files for each braille volume.

If you press y and specify an output file, it will be used.  Otherwise, the output is written to volume spec.txt.

If you press n, each volume is translated into a separate file with a .txt extension.

You can translate or emboss multiple volumes by clicking the translate or emboss buttons discussed above.

You can also translate multiple text volumes into braille.  Enter a volume spec as described above.  Answer the combine files question.  Then check the text to braille radio button.

When you click the volumes button, the input button is disabled.  If you change your mind about multiple volumes, click the volumes button again.  Multiple volumes is canceled and the input button is enabled.

Preferences:

You can customize WinTrans to take advantage of NfbTrans's powerful formatting and translation capabilities by clicking the preferences button.  Tab to it and press enter or press ALT+P.

This dialog contains edit boxes, check boxes, radio buttons and regular buttons.  Each one has a corresponding hot key so you can quickly and easily go to the item you want to change.  They are:
Left margin ALT+M
Copies ALT+C
Page width ALT+W
Page len ALT+L
Start page ALT+S
End page ALT+E
Formfeed ALT+F
V-Tab ALT+V
Blanks ALT+B
Interpoint ALT+I
Sound ALT+U
Config file ALT+N
Format file ALT+R
Table files ALT+T
Commands ALT+D
Apply ALT+A
Ok ALT+O
Exit ALT+X

The left margin edit box (ALT+M) sets the left margin for the files you are translating.  Change this setting if the text you are translating is not left justified.  The default is 1.  See the lm= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The copies edit box (ALT+C) sets the number of copies to emboss.  The default is 1.  See the co= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The page width edit box (ALT+W) sets the maximum number of braille cells per line.  The default is 40.  See the pw= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The page len edit box (ALT+L) sets the number of lines per braille page.  The default is 25.  See the pl= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The start page edit box (ALT+S) sets the first braille page to be embossed.  The default is 1.  This option accepts any valid page specification.  You can enter an ending page and set roman and arabic numerals paging as well.  See the ps= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The end page edit box (ALT+E) sets the last braille page to be embossed.  The default is 9999 (end of document).  See the pe= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The pageBreaks radio buttons tell the embosser what to do at the end of each braille page.  The default is formfeed, which separates pages with a formfeed character.  The hotkey is ALT+F.
The V-tab option separates pages with the vertical tab character.  The hotkey is ALT+V.
The blanks option separates pages with the appropriate number of blank lines.  The hotkey is ALT+B.  See the ls= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The interpoint checkbox (ALT+I) turns interpoint embossing on and off.  Check this box if you are going to emboss both sides of each page.  The hotkey toggles the check box.  The default is off.  See the ip= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The sound check box (ALT+U) toggles sound for NfbTrans.  When checked, all sounds are enabled.  When unchecked, all sounds are disabled except for error notifications.  See the so= option in the NfbTrans manual for details.

The config file edit box (ALT+N) sets the configuration file for NfbTrans.  The default is nfbtrans.cnf.  Be sure the file exists before you define it here.  If it doesn't, you are alerted and Wintrans uses the default.
See part 4 of the NfbTrans manual for details on building custom configuration files.

The format file edit box (ALT+R) allows you to set an external format language file for NfbTrans.  Be sure the file exists before you define it here.  If it doesn't, you are alerted and no EFL file is used.  See the le= option in part 4 of the NfbTrans manual and part 6 of the manual for more information on the external format language.

The table files edit box (ALT+T) allows you to define translation tables for NfbTrans.The form is BrlTable.tabsemi-colon;BakTable.tab where 
BrlTable.tab is the text to braille translation table and BakTable.tab is the braille to text translation table.  The default is braille.tabsemi-colon;back.tab and does not appear in the edit box.

You can change the braille table and leave the back table alone by entering the name of the braille table alone without the semi-colon.  You can change the back table and leave the braille table alone by preceding the name of the back table file with a semi-colon;.  Make sure the table files exist before defining them here.  If they don't, you are alerted and Wintrans uses the appropriate defaults.  If your braille table does not exist, braille.tab is used.  If your back table does not exist, back.tab is used.  See the tf= option in the NfbTrans manual and part 9 of the manual for details on changing translation tables.

The port edit box allows you to change the port to which your embosser is connected.  The default is LPT1:  There is no hotkey.  Valid ports are: LPT1:, LPT2: ... or COM1:, COM2: etc.

The commands edit box (ALT+D) allows you to enter any valid command line arguments for NfbTrans.  See part 4 of the NfbTrans manual for details on command line options.

The apply button (ALT+A) changes the settings for the current session only.  The defaults stored in wintrans.ini will be restored the next time you run Wintrans.

The ok button (ALT+O) changes the settings and saves those changes to disk.  They will be in effect for the current and all future sessions.

The exit button (ALT+X) exits the preferences dialog and returns you to the main screen.

Stats:

Tab to the stats button and press enter or press ALT+S.  An edit box appears with the statistics from the last file or files translated.  Click the close button or press ALT+C to return to the main screen.

Exit:

Click the exit button, press ALT+F4 or ALT+X to exit.  You need not leave the program after the first translation.  You can translate or embossas many files as you like before exiting.
