Subject:
EdSharp Command Line Switches Wish
From:
"Homme, James" <james.homme@highmark.com>
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2010 11:39:53 -0400
To:
"Jamal Mazrui" <empower@smart.net>

Hi Jamal,

Would you please consider putting in the following two switches? s: for section and l: for line? You would run EdSharp like this. EdSharp s:My section, or EdSharp l:323 to make it jump to line 323. And if you put the name of a file in the current document followed by a space, followed by a section name and press the key to open the file, it will jump to the section. I got the idea from NoteTab. In Notetab, though, you put the file name: line number in brackets and I think you have to put a space between the brackets and the string. What do you think about the idea of putting some sort of delimiter in there.

 

I'm also contemplating the idea of making something that would know how to read through a structured text file and break each section into a smaller HTML file with next and previous links and a separate table of contents file. I don't know how useful that would be though. And I'm also thinking of a sort of extended markdown where you would put instructions on lines that begin with equal signs. I can write up a plan and you can shoot holes in it. My thinking was to create a separate program as a VB.net project I'm interested in doing for myself that would use the scheme to turn files into HTML. I was debating if I should use the common wiki formatting or create my own scheme. Anyway, it would be a program that I would be interested in, and it would break the learning curve down a bit. I could learn some VB.net before I tackle learning to use HomerApp.

 

Thanks.

 

Jim

 

Jim

 

Jim Homme,

Usability Services,

Phone: 412-544-1810. Skype: jim.homme

Internal recipients,  Read my accessibility blog. Discuss accessibility here. Accessibility Wiki: Breaking news and accessibility advice

 

This e-mail and any attachments to it are confidential and are intended solely for use of the individual or entity to whom they are addressed. If you have received this e-mail in error, please notify the sender immediately and then delete it. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not keep, use, disclose, copy or distribute this e-mail without the author's prior permission. The views expressed in this e-mail message do not necessarily represent the views of Highmark Inc., its subsidiaries, or affiliates.
