Teach Your Apps To Work With Windows Vista User Account Control   
      ©2009 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Least Privilege
Teach Your Apps To Play Nicely With Windows Vista User Account Control
Chris Corio

      This article discusses: 
        User Account Control 
        Designing applications to run as standard users 
        Elevating privileges when neccessary 
      This article uses the following technologies: 
      Windows Vista


 Contents 
Active at Logon 
Creating a Filtered Token 
Designing Apps to Run with the Filtered Token 
Designing Apps that Require Administrator Privileges 
Privileges During Installation 
Marking the Privileges for an MSI 
Running Your App with Administrator Privileges 
Marking Required Privileges Using an Application Manifest 
Marking a COM Object 
Alerting Users to Elevated Privileges 
Communicating between Processes in Different Security Contexts 
Low Rights Internet Explorer 
Securing a Windows Service in Windows Vista 
Common Application Compatibility Issues 
Problems During Installation 
Typical Runtime Application Issues 
Conclusion 

Ihave worked with so many developers over the past year that their concerns and 
their eventual understanding of how User Account Control (UAC) works have all 
blended into a giant haze. There really is no doubt: it will take time to learn 
how to write good applications for standard users, but this knowledge will make 
you a better programmer for Windows®. The goal of this article is to give you 
the information necessary to make the journey quick and easy.
UAC is the Microsoft answer to reducing the privileges users run with by default 
in Windows Vista™. Strategically, Microsoft is moving to an environment where 
users do not have or need privileges that can affect the operating system and 
machine-wide configuration in order to perform day-to-day tasks. Such an 
environment also keeps users from affecting each other's state and settings. 
There are countless practical reasons for this move. UAC limits the privileges 
that applications run with by default. In the enterprise, this lets users run in 
the Users group rather than as Administrators, allowing meaningful corporate 
security policies to be enforced. This in turn reduces user impact on machines, 
lowering the total cost of ownership (TCO). In the home, malware cannot affect 
the system or install a service or driver without the user going through the UAC 
Consent or Credential prompt. While the risk of social engineering still exists, 
the consolidation of the path to obtain elevated privileges allows the future 
implementation of technologies to control which applications can execute with 
machine-wide privileges without the need to prompt the user.
The primary goal of UAC is to make the default user token that applications are 
run with mimic that of a member of the Users group. This starts with creating a 
restricted, or filtered, token during interactive logon for users with elevated 
privileges. When more privileges are necessary to execute a restricted 
operation, the user will be prompted for authorization on the secure desktop. 
UAC also includes other technologies to support application compatibility and to 
secure the elevated processes.


Active at Logon
UAC starts working when a user logs onto a machine. During an interactive logon, 
the Local Security Authority (LSA) takes the user's credentials and performs the 
initial logon, evaluating the user's token to see if it has what are defined as 
elevated privileges. If the LSA determines that the user has elevated 
privileges, it will filter this token and then perform a second logon with the 
filtered token. The most common case in which a user will have both a filtered 
and fully privileged token is when the user is a member of the Administrators 
group. The fully privileged token of an administrator can write to machine-wide 
locations such as Program Files and HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE (HKLM), thus affecting 
the entire machine. However, the filtered token is just like a member of the 
Users group, which doesn't have these privileges, and is used to create the 
user's interactive desktop session.
The desktop session and explor­er.exe will always be created with a token that 
approximates the token of a member of the Users group. Any process that is 
initiated from the Start Menu or by a user double-clicking in an Explorer window 
that doesn't require elevation will simply inherit this filtered token. 
Therefore, by default, every application will be running with the standard user 
token. When a process is marked as requiring administrator privileges in the 
manifest or in the application compatibility settings, UAC will prompt the user 
for elevation. Figures 1 and 2 show the prompts for consent and for credentials. 
If the user so authorizes, the Application Information service will create the 
process with the fully privileged token. 
 
Figure 1 Prompt for Consent (Click the image for a larger view)
 
Figure 2 Prompt for Credentials (Click the image for a larger view)


Creating a Filtered Token
User Account Control defines the groups listed in Figure 3 as having elevated 
privileges. Therefore, if the LSA notices that any of those group memberships or 
privileges are listed in the user's initial token, a filtered token will be 
created during an interactive logon, using a version of the 
CreateRestrictedToken API, and the fully privileged token is saved by LSA. These 
two tokens are linked and the fully privileged token can be obtained from the 
filtered token using the Get­Token­Infor­mation API with the new 
TokenLinkedToken information type. Note, however, that UAC does not affect 
service, network, or batch logons.
 Figure 3 Elevated Privelages 

      Built-In Administrators
      Power Users
      Account Operators
      Server Operators
      Printer Operators
      Backup Operators
      RAS Servers Group
      Windows NT 4.0 App Compat Group
      Network Configuration Operators
      Domain Administrators 
      Domain Controllers
      Certificate Publishers
      Schema Administrators
      Enterprise Administrators 
      Group Policy Administrators

If the user does not belong to any of the groups listed in Figure 3 but has 
certain privileges, a filtered token will be created with these privileges 
removed. The privileges in question are: SeCreateTokenPriv­i­lege, 
SeTcbPrivilege, Se­Take­Owner­ship­Priv­ilege, Se­Back­up­Priv­i­lege, 
Se­Re­store­Privilege, Se­De­bug­Priv­ilege, Se­Im­personatePrivilege, and 
Se­Re­labelPrivilege.
If the user is a member of the Ad­ministrators group, the filtered token will 
have the Administrators group membership set to DENY ONLY, which prohibits 
AccessCheck from using this group to allow access to a resource. Also, all 
machine-impacting privileges are removed from the token. (This is the default 
token used to create explorer.exe and non-elevated processes.) You can look at 
this token using whoami.exe, which is included in Windows Vista; just run 
whoami.exe /all in a Command window. Figure 4 and Figure 5 respectively describe 
group memberships listed in the token and privileges in the token.
 Figure 5 Privelages Included in Filtered Token 

      Privilege Description
      SeShutdownPrivilegeShut down the system.
      SeChangeNotifyPrivilege Bypass traverse checking.
      SeUndockPrivilege Remove computer from docking station.
      SeIncreaseWorkingSetPrivilege Increase a process working set.
      SeTimeZonePrivilege Change the time zone.

 Figure 4 Group Membership Listed in Filtered Token 

      Group NameAttributes
      Group NameAttributes
      EveryoneMandatory group, enabled by default, enabled group
      BUILTIN\Administrators Group used for deny only
      BUILTIN\Users Mandatory group, enabled by default, enabled group
      Mandatory Label\Medium Mandatory Level Mandatory group, enabled by 
      default, enabled group



Designing Apps to Run with the Filtered Token
Most applications do not require administrator privileges at run time. If your 
application doesn't maintain cross-session state while it executes and doesn't 
do something like modifying the local security policy, it should be just fine 
running with a standard-user token. Sometimes certain parts of your application 
will require administrator privileges, and you should separate out those pieces 
into a separate process. I'll get into that a little later. 
The most important step you can take during the development of a standard user 
application is to test it while running as a standard user. One of the most 
common reasons an application fails in production is because the developers 
never tested it as a standard user. Remember to do this. 
The next most important step is deciding where to save your application binaries 
and per-user configuration data. An application that is completely per-user, 
meaning that both its binaries and configuration are specific to the user, 
should maintain all of its state in the user profile: %userprofile%. In the 
registry, you should write all of the state to the user's hive, 
HKEY_CURRENT_USER (HKCU). In many cases, it makes sense to install the binaries 
into the %ProgramFiles% directory but this requires administrator privileges and 
is discussed later in the article. 
Sometimes, as when you're storing high scores for a game, you need to maintain 
system-wide state and allow users to write to it. The recommended place to store 
this data is in the %allusersprofile% directory. Here you can create a directory 
specific to your application and allow users to write to it. Just remember, 
other users can tamper with this file.


Designing Apps that Require Administrator Privileges
My honest advice about writing applications that require administrator 
privileges is: don't do it! Unless you're absolutely certain that your 
application requires elevated privileges, just write your application to use the 
standard user token. There are very few APIs that must be called by 
administrators.
Of course, there are circumstances where you might need to use administrator 
privileges, like during installation or when you're maintaining cross-session 
state, which generally means your application is implemented as a service. UAC 
doesn't apply to services; there are other security settings available for 
Windows services that I'll discuss later. If your application implements a 
security model on the local machine, you'd also need administrator privileges. 
For example, if you have settings that are deployed with a Group Policy 
Application Distribution and Management (ADM) or through Systems Management 
Server (SMS), you will probably have an application on the local machine to 
update them as well. This would require administrator privileges. 


Privileges During Installation
Installing applications typically requires administrator privileges, usually 
because application binaries are written to the Program Files directory, which 
is read-only for standard users. This means that any application that writes 
binaries to this location will need to be marked as requiring administrator 
privileges. Because Windows Installer has been integrated with UAC, installation 
packages (MSI files) have become an even more attractive method for 
installation. They can be specified in two ways: to be per-user or per-machine 
installations, which would only prompt the user for administrator privileges 
when necessary. 
While installation to the Program Files directory will result in an elevation 
prompt being shown to users, there are definitely benefits to putting the 
application's binaries there. Installing in that directory requires the user to 
be an administrator so a standard user in an enterprise or a Parental Controls 
user couldn't arbitrarily install the application. Also, your application will 
share one set of binaries across the machine and they will be protected from 
tampering by a standard user. This will make it easier to determine the state 
and version of the application when updating the binaries after a bug fix or to 
add functionality. 
When you design your application, there will likely be some application settings 
you'll want applied for the user. Perhaps the users specify custom information 
about how their views are shown or which menus are displayed. A good way to 
provide this facility is to create a default template under the Program Files 
directory, then copy and modify it in the user's AppData directory, 
%local­appdata%. This data can be copied at first run of your application and 
enables per-user state for each user. If, on the other hand, you want 
machine-wide state that individual users can modify, you would want to put this 
in the %allusersprofile%, as in the high scores example mentioned earlier.
Another aspect of installation that causes some grief in the UAC world is 
updating. If you are going to update binaries in the Program Files directory, 
the process overwriting the binaries must have administrator or system 
privileges. One benefit of using Windows Installer is the ability to patch using 
an MSI patch (MSP) file. Since Windows Installer 3.1, which is a required update 
for Windows XP, an MSP file will be applied to the system if it is signed by a 
certificate that was included in the original MSI file. For more information, 
see the documentation on User Account Control Patching on MSDN® (at 
windows­sdk.msdn.micro­soft.com/ms710366.aspx).
Other than using MSI files, application developers can either integrate a binary 
that is specified to run with administrator privileges-which will prohibit 
updating in an enterprise with standard users-or include a service that will 
execute any updates required. Shipping a service is strongly discouraged because 
any security vulnerability in the service could make the ISV an attack vector 
for malware. MSP files are your best bet.


Marking the Privileges for an MSI
Before Windows Vista, the ALLUSERS property was used to mark whether an MSI file 
would install an application's shortcuts to the user location or for all users 
on the machine. These shortcuts included the DesktopFolder, ProgramMenuFolder, 
StartMenuFolder, and StartupFolder. Because there was no analogous per-user 
Program Files directory, the application binaries generally were still written 
to the Program Files directory.
Unfortunately, for app compatibility reasons Windows Installer could not 
determine whether the user should be prompted for credentials based solely on 
the ALLUSERS property. Instead, an additional bit was allocated in the MSI file 
to determine whether to prompt the user. This is bit 3 in the Word Count Summary 
property. If this bit is set to 1, the package is assumed to be a per-user MSI 
and the user will not be prompted for an Administrator token.
To specify that a package can only be installed by an administrator into the 
Public profile, set ALLUSERS="1" or ALLUSERS="2" and set bit 3 of the Word Count 
Summary property to 0. To specify that a package is a per-user installation that 
can be installed by a standard user, set ALLUSERS="" or don't define the 
property, and set bit 3 of the Word Count Summary property to 1.


Running Your App with Administrator Privileges
There are times that you may need administrator privileges for an application. 
You may write code that directly interacts with a piece of hardware or an app 
that sets machine-wide settings in HKLM. When possible, you should design your 
apps to limit the need for admin privileges to narrow sections of code, or 
communicate to an application started with full administrator privileges. 
Aside from MSI-based elevation, there are two ways to create processes with a 
user's full administrator token. The Application Information Service (AIS) will 
check during process creation and during the creation of a COM object using the 
CoCreateAsAdmin moniker to see if the binaries require administrator privilege. 
It is important to note that the elevation occurs at the time of process 
creation. The process token never has privileges or group membership added 
during run time, only when it is created.
One word of caution: the UAC elevation prompt is only presented to the user when 
ShellExecute is called to create the process. ERROR_ELEVATION_REQUIRED is 
returned by any call to the CreateProcess family that requires elevation. 


Marking Required Privileges Using an Application Manifest
When a new process is created, the AIS will inspect the binary to determine 
whether it requires elevation. The first thing that gets checked is the 
application manifest that is embedded into the application's resources. This 
takes precedence over any other type of application marking including an 
application compatibility marking or UAC's Installer Detection, which is 
described later. The manifest defines a run level that tells Windows the 
privileges needed to run the binary. The three choices for run level are: 
asInvoker, highestAvailable, and requireAdministrator. 
When AIS finds a binary that is marked with the "asInvoker" run level, it takes 
no action and the process inherits the process token of the parent process that 
created it. The "requireAdministrator" run level is pretty straightforward as 
well and defines that the process must be created by a user token that is a 
member of the administrator group. If the user who attempted to create this 
process is not an administrator, he will be presented with the Credential dialog 
to input his credentials.
The highestAvailable run level is a little more complicated. It denotes that if 
a user has a linked token, then the application should run with the higher 
privileged token. This is generally used for applications that have a UI 
designed for the Users and Administrators groups and it ensures that the 
application gets the user's full privileges. It is important to note that users 
in the Backup Operators and Network Operators group will have a linked token and 
will be prompted for their credentials; the credentials dialog will have their 
user tile and those of the members of the administrators group. Figure 6 is an 
example of an application manifest.
 Figure 6 AdminApp.exe.manifest for AdminAppl.exe 
 Copy Code
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes"?>
<assembly xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1" manifestVersion="1.0"> 
  <assemblyIdentity version="1.0.0.0"
     processorArchitecture="X86" name="AdminApp" type="win32"/> 
  <description>Description of your application</description> 
  <!-- Identify the application security requirements. -->
  <ms_asmv2:trustInfo xmlns:ms_asmv2="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v2">
    <ms_asmv2:security>
      <ms_asmv2:requestedPrivileges>
        <ms_asmv2:requestedExecutionLevel
          level="requireAdministrator"
          uiAccess="false"/>
        </ms_asmv2:requestedPrivileges>
       </ms_asmv2:security>
  </ms_asmv2:trustInfo>
</assembly>

The application manifest marking is only relevant to EXEs, not DLLs. This is 
because UAC does not inspect DLLs during the creation of the process. To embed 
this manifest into your native application, copy the manifest file into the same 
directory as your source and add the manifest into the resource files to specify 
that the manifest is to be embedded. The following lines in the .rc file would 
embed the manifest above if it were saved as Ad­min­App.exe.man­ifest: 
 Copy Code
#define MANIFEST_RESOURCE_ID 1
MANIFEST_RESOURCE_ID RT_MANIFEST "AdminApp.exe.manifest"


Marking a COM Object
When a COM object is being created, you can use the Co­Cre­ateAsAdmin moniker to 
get a COM object running with elevated privileges. This is very useful for 
creating objects that run elevated and are exposed in your application's UI. 
There are a couple additions that must be made to a COM object so it can run 
with the fully privileged token. A display name to show in the UAC elevation 
dialog must be specified as well as a marking showing that the object can be 
created with elevated privileges. The following registry keys must be added to 
the registration of your object. 
 Copy Code
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes\CLSID\
 {CLSID}\LocalizedString = <displayname>
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes\CLSID\ 
 {CLSID}\Elevation\Enabled = 1
If the COM object is not registered in HKLM and both of these pieces of 
information are not specified, then trying to create the elevated COM object 
will fail. If it succeeds, the user will be prompted for elevation, assuming the 
call is coming from a process with a filtered token, and a new process will be 
created to host the COM object. For more information about creating elevated COM 
objects, see the MSDN documentation for the CoCreateAsAdmin moniker at 
msdn2.microsoft.com/ms679687.aspx.


Alerting Users to Elevated Privileges
Another challenge for UAC is communicating to users that may not have any notion 
of the difference between an application that is running with reduced privileges 
and one that is running as an administrator. The key to understanding this 
difference is the standardized workflow when the prompt for elevation occurs. 
The elevation sequence always begins with the user clicking on something that 
has a shield image in its icon. If starting an application is going to cause an 
elevation, you should see a shield overlaying the icon. Anywhere in your 
application that causes elevation should be marked with a shield. 
Many of the common controls have been updated to allow you to add shields to 
them. This is extremely helpful if you want to expose settings where clicking on 
a button or link results in the creation of a new process that will require 
elevation. The code to add the shield glyph is very simple. For example, the 
standard button control (PUSHBUTTON, DEFPUSHBUTTON) has been enhanced to let you 
add an icon along with the displayed text, without requiring the BS_ICON or 
BS_BITMAP styles to be set. 
 
Figure 7 The Shield on a Button 
To show the shield icon (which you can see in Figure 7), you should call the 
following macro (defined in commctrl.h), which sends a SETSHIELD message to the 
button: 
 Copy Code
Button_SetElevationRequiredState(hwndButton, true);The same style of showing the shield can be used for Aero™ Wizard buttons, 
Syslink and Hyperlink controls, Commandlink and Command buttons, and more.


Communicating between Processes in Different Security Contexts
Windows Vista also includes an authentication technology called Windows 
Integrity Mechanism (WIM). WIM defines different security levels that are used 
as labels on objects for further authorization: Low, Medium, High, and System. 
Because of UAC there may be processes in the same desktop session that have full 
administrator privileges and others that are running with a standard user token. 
UAC uses WIM to block Windows messages from being sent between processes of 
different privilege levels. 
The token used to create the desktop will be running at the medium integrity 
level-see the sample filtered administrator token. This way everything by 
default is running with an integrity level of medium. When a user is prompted 
for elevation and gives his consent, the resulting process is created with the 
fully privileged token and has an integrity level of high. In the past, there 
have been attacks, called "shatter attacks," where a lower-privileged UI sends 
messages to a higher-privileged UI to drive the higher privileged process. In 
order to avoid this, most Windows messages are no longer sent from lower 
privileged processes to higher privileged processes, and this is based on the 
integrity level. 
There are still ways to communicate between processes of different integrity 
levels. You can use shared memory or a remote procedure call (RPC). Be sure that 
when you create your RPC entry point or IPC mechanism, you specify that it can 
be connected to by a process that is running as a standard user. You will need 
to specify this in the object's security descriptor.


Low Rights Internet Explorer
One other side note about WIM and UAC is that it enables LowRights Internet 
Explorer®, a setting that takes advantage of the low integrity level to protect 
users while they browse the Web. When running at Low, the process can interact 
with a very narrow set of directories and files on the system. If you have an 
ActiveX® control implemented as part of your application, which is hosted by 
Internet Explorer, you will want to test it to make sure it runs properly. For 
more information, see the whitepaper at 
msdn.micro­soft.com/library/en-us/ietechcol/dnwebgen/protectedmode.asp.


Securing a Windows Service in Windows Vista
There are many new facilities for locking down services in Windows Vista. 
Developers can specify the privilege level that a service needs, and a service 
can have a Security Identifier (SID) applied to it, which can be used to secure 
resources so that only the service can write to them. Services can also be 
prevented from accessing the network. For more information, see the 
documentation on Windows services available at 
micro­soft.com/whdc/system/vista/Vista_Services.mspx.
You can still use sc.exe to define these new security parameters in Windows 
Vista (see Figure 8). Privileges is a string that contains a list of privileges 
that are separated by a forward slash (/). For example, to specify backup and 
restore privileges, set Privileges to SeBackupPrivilege/SeRestorePrivilege.
 Figure 8 Sc.exe Commands 

      Command SyntaxPurpose
      Privs sc <server> privs [service name} [privileges]Sets the required 
      privileges for a service. 
      Qprivssc <server> qprivs [service name] buffersizeQueries for the required 
      privileges of a service.
      Sidtypesc <server> sidtype [service name] [type]Applies service SID to 
      process token. 
      Qsidtypesc <server> qsidtype [service name]Retrieves the setting for 
      service's SID.

Sc.exe can also be used to get a specified service's SID. The following command 
returns the SID for a service that is named service name. 
 Copy Code
Sc showsid [service name]To programmatically change this information, use the new API called 
ChangeServiceConfig2. To change the service privileges specified, call 
ChangeServiceConfig2 with the following parameter values. (The change in 
privileges takes effect the next time the service is started.)
The dwInfo parameter should be SERVICE_CONFIG_REQUIRED_PRIVILEGES_INFO and the 
lpInfo buffer should point to a SERVICE_REQUIRED_PRIVILEGES_INFO structure. This 
structure contains a single multistring that lists the required privileges.
To enforce the service SID for the service, set the flag programmatically, 
calling ChangeServiceConfig2 with the following parameter values. (The change 
takes effect the next time the system is booted.) The dwInfo parameter should be 
set to SERVICE_CONFIG_SERVICE_SID_INFO, and the lpInfo buffer should be set to 
point to a SERVICE_SID_INFO structure. This structure contains a single DWORD 
member that contains the SID type.
Two related public functions are also useful to service owners: 
LookupAccountName and LookupAccountSID. Look­up­AccountName takes a SID and 
returns the associated service name while LookupAccountSID takes a service name 
and returns the associated SID. To query the values of these settings use the 
QueryServiceConfig2 API.
Another way to protect your service is to limit its access to the network. To 
configure firewall restrictions for the service, use the 
INetFwServiceRestriction interface.
One last note-be wary of exposing RPC interfaces that can be connected to from 
lower-privileged processes. These interfaces should be carefully designed and 
tested so that the tasks that can be performed on the user's behalf do not allow 
an elevation of privilege by the user. 


Common Application Compatibility Issues
One of the biggest challenges our team encountered while producing UAC was the 
incredible impact it had on our application ecosystem. Many applications were 
not designed to be run by a member of the Users group. Microsoft has invested 
many hours to understand the common application compatibility issues and has 
added technologies to Windows Vista to address some of the problems. In the 
final section of this article, I will describe some of the problems and briefly 
describe how to fix them. 
The first application compatibility technology that is part of UAC is called 
Installer Detection. Because most installers write binaries to the Program Files 
directory, they overwhelmingly need administrator privileges. Installer 
Detection is designed to scan the name and the resources of the EXE to determine 
whether an application is an installer. For example, an executable would be 
marked as an installer if the executable name or description contained the 
strings "install" or "setup". So an application named setup.exe, without an 
application manifest, would trigger a UAC elevation if launched by a token 
without administrator privileges. 
Another technology under the UAC umbrella designed to help fix file and registry 
issues at run time is called File and Registry Virtualization. Many applications 
write their log files or their configuration to the Program Files or Windows 
directory. These directories do not allow a standard user to write to these 
locations and hence these writes would immediately fail. In order to fix these 
issues, File Virtualization takes the files written to certain protected 
locations in the file system and redirects the writes to the user's profile-it 
will not perform virtualization if the file being written to is a binary. 
Registry virtualization does the same thing for the registry by redirecting 
writes to HKLM\Software to a per-user location in the registry. These 
technologies have raised the application compatibility for legacy applications 
immensely.
One important note is that these technologies are disabled if the binary has an 
application manifest or if the binaries are natively compiled for 64-bit. This 
is because these technologies are really just crutches for legacy applications 
that were not designed with the standard user in mind. Unfortunately, these 
technologies don't solve all of the problems. Next, I'll look at some other 
common issues.


Problems During Installation
One of the most frequent problems we see is mismarked CustomActions in an MSI 
file. Many CustomActions do not specify the no impersonate flag 
msidbCustomActionTypeNoImpersonate, causing the CustomAction to be run as Local 
System. Because the default token on Windows Vista is now similar to that of a 
member of the Users group, these MSI files fail because the CustomActions 
attempt to do something that requires administrator privileges. Usually this can 
be fixed by merely adding the msidbCustomActionTypeNoImpersonate attribute to 
the CustomActions.
Another typical problem we've encountered during testing concerns applications 
that are launched as part of an install. It is very common to start an 
application at the end of installation. Unfortunately, the application is often 
started under the wrong user context because the user provided elevated 
credentials to perform the installation and the application is created with the 
elevated user token. The recommended guidance for solving this problem is to 
create a bootstrapper EXE. This bootstrapper may unpack the binaries to a temp 
location and then start another process that initiates the installation (see 
Figure 9). When the process that started the installation completes, it returns 
control to the unpacker that starts the application. This way the application is 
running with the standard user token.
 
Figure 9 Using a Bootstrapper to Install and Execute an App (Click the image for 
a larger view)
The last installation issue we've often come up against is performing operations 
that require administrator privileges on the first run of the application. These 
include copying or updating binaries into Program Files, installing a driver, or 
any other operation that assumes the user is an administrator. The best way to 
get a handle on these issues is to test your application when installed and run 
as a standard user.
Many applications have some mechanism for updating the application binaries. 
Often these updaters fail because they are running with a lower-privileged token 
and attempt to overwrite the binaries in the Program Files directory. If your 
application updates its binaries, move the update functionality to a separate 
process and mark it as requiring administrator privilege. Another option is to 
employ MSP files to do the elevation based on the signature of the patch. For 
this, you would need to populate the MsiPatchCertificate table in your original 
MSI file.


Typical Runtime Application Issues
One of the most common mistakes that occur at run time is an unnecessary check 
to see if the user is an administrator. In many games, for example, the first 
thing checked is whether the user is a member of the administrator group. Often 
the games will report a failure to the user-but they actually don't ever call 
any APIs that require administrator privileges! Obviously, this should be 
avoided. However, for resiliency, if you write an application that requires 
administrator privileges and is manifested, add this check and exit if the user 
doesn't have administrator privileges.
Many applications will begin execution and immediately attempt to register a 
class to HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT (HKCR). Because the applications no longer have 
administrator privileges, it will be impossible for them to write to this 
location and the operation will fail. Registering these classes should be done 
during installation or redirected to the user's classes root: 
HKCU\Software\Classes.
Another potential issue to look out for is that standard users are prevented 
from creating objects in the Global namespace. For example, a standard user 
could not create a Named Pipe or Shared Memory within the namespace. Global is 
intended only for use by services or applications maintaining cross-session 
state. The Local namespace should be used instead. This is writable by a 
standard user.
Using MAX_ALLOWED when opening an object is another issue. In Windows XP, it is 
generally assumed that the users running the applications were administrators. 
Therefore, when developers used MAX_ALLOWED when opening files and registry 
keys, there was never a problem in this environment because they were always 
opening the files with full administrator rights. In Windows Vista, this has 
changed. Now, when developers write applications they need to be more careful 
when specifying the privileges a user will need to open an object.


Conclusion
This article is an overview of the new environment you'll be developing under in 
Windows Vista. The most fundamental change is that applications now run with a 
lower-privileged token by default and thus cannot impact the machine or other 
users. For more information about topics related to UAC in Windows Vista, see 
the UAC whitepapers mentioned earlier on MSDN and TechNet. And remember that UAC 
will make the lives of your users and systems administrators a lot easier.


Chris Corio was a member of the Windows Security team at Microsoft for more than 
five years. His primary focus at Microsoft was application security technologies 
and management technologies for securing Windows. You can reach Chris at 
winsecurity@chriscorio.com. 

