The Code King - Making Your Application UAC AwareThe Code King 
 Senior software engineer with over 10 years experience in a wide range of 
technologies. the successful exploitation of new ideas, process, or way of 
thinking
Making Your Application UAC Aware 

Introduction
This article is a guide to making applications UAC aware for Vista, and aims to 
explain some of the pitfalls of failing to do so. An application can be made 
Vista aware through the use of an embedded manifest. Without this Windows may 
virtualize access to resources which effects both file system and registry 
access.
 
Background
As you may know, permission control in Vista has changed radically. This is 
partly due to the realization that the vast majority of Windows users login to 
their machines with an administrator account, rather than using the recommended 
limited account which has more restrictive permissions. Applications running on 
the machine inherit these user permissions and therefore are usually running 
with full administrative rights. This obviously makes the operating system much 
more vulnerable to malicious software and viruses than was originally intended. 
The answer that the Windows team came up with is UAC, or User Account Control. 
With UAC it doesn't matter if you login as administrator, all accounts run under 
the same limited set of permissions and are not permitted to access protected 
resources unless explicitly allowed. Instead applications must now ask 
permission from the user in order to gain access to these resources, known as 
elevation. 
Elevation happens when an application that is flagged as needing administrative 
permissions is first launched, or when an application is explicitly launched 
with a run as administrator command by the user. This is the only time 
applications can do this as applications cannot change their level later and 
decide to elevate once running. To do this the process must be terminated and 
relaunched under a new set of permissions, requesting authorization from the 
user to do so. The only exception to this is if an application is launched from 
an existing elevated process. In this case the second process inherits the 
privileges from the first and the user is not prompted. 
The elevation request takes the form of a dialog box that consumes the desktop 
and is secured against inter-process communication. The user is required to make 
a choice to allow the application the requested elevation rights or to refuse 
it. Applications cannot elevate without this user interaction, and this helps 
secure the desktop from unsecure access to resources. 
The impact of UAC is huge, and even effects something as insignificant as the 
task tray clock. In Vista you will notice you can no longer change the system 
time by simply clicking on the clock, this is an administrative task and 
requires elevation. 
Virtualization
One of the problems that arise from the introduction of UAC is that many legacy 
applications still require access to folders and registry settings that are now 
protected; for instance applications which store configuration data in the 
Program Files directory instead of using the inbuilt Common AppData path. This 
is no longer allowed and leads to compatibility issues. 
In order to improve compatibility and allow legacy applications to run in a UAC 
enabled environment, the operating system uses virtualization. This creates a 
virtualized view of file system and registry resources accessed by the 
application, and redirects the requests transparently behind the scenes to 
alternative sandboxed locations. In most cases this can allow a legacy 
application to function as normal, however this comes with a performance 
overhead and is only a short term solution. These applications ultimately need 
to be rewritten to remove their reliance on any protected resources, and instead 
use the recommended locations to store application and user data. 
File system virtualization:
    Real path
    C:\Program Files\Foo\Foo bar\config.ini
    
    Virtual path
    C:\Users\<account>\AppData\Local\VirtualStore\Program Files\Foo\Foo bar\config.ini
    Registry virtualization:
    Real path
    HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\FooKey
    
    Virtual path
    HKEY_USERS\<User SID>_Classes\VirtualStore\Machine\Software\FooKey
    It goes without saying that a developer should never reference these virtual 
locations in code. The correct locations for storing application and user data 
are determined by the environment variables and Windows API. Legacy applications 
that already use these to read/write application data to the Common AppData 
folder for instance, won't require virtualization. On Vista this path would 
correctly resolve to C:\ProgramData.
The Manifest
The manifest is an xml resource file that can be embedded into the application. 
In terms of UAC, this serves 2 purposes. Firstly it tells the operating system 
that the application has been designed with UAC in mind, and that it therefore 
should not attempt to virtualize any folders or registry settings. If the 
application still attempts to access protected resources after making it's 
declaration, then these requests will simply fail rather than virtualize. The 
other thing it does is allow the application to state the privilege level at 
which it needs to run, and whether it requires elevation. 
An example manifest file.
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes"?>
        <assembly xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1" manifestVersion="1.0">
        <trustInfo xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v3">
            <security>
                <requestedPrivileges>
                    <requestedExecutionLevel level="asInvoker" uiAccess="false"/>
                </requestedPrivileges>
            </security>
        </trustInfo>
    </assembly> 
    These files have been around for a while, and the new section added for UAC 
control is the requestedExecutionLevel element. The level attribute may be one 
of the following values: 
      LevelDescription
      asInvokerDoes not require elevation, runs without requesting elevation 
      using privileges of it's parent process.
      highestAvailableRequests the highest available privilege tokens of it's 
      parent process. An administrator account will attempt to elevate to full 
      administrator level, but a standard account will only request elevation to 
      it's own highest set of access tokens.
      requireAdministratorRequires elevation to full administrator privileges.

Most applications should use the asInvoker level, as this will not prompt the 
user for elevation every time it's run, and will use the standard set of 
privileges to access the unprotected resources it needs. Only applications that 
require access to protected resources should use the higher access levels. 
The uiAccess attribute determines whether the application requires access to any 
protected UI elements, such as system dialog boxes or higher-level processes. 
Only signed applications may do this as it requires additional security tokens. 
This value defaults to false. 
Techniques for adding the manifest vary between technologies and languages. For 
.Net managed applications the following command lines can be used in a 
post-build step, or via a command prompt using the Microsoft MT.exe tool. Note 
that the final parameter changes depending on whether the application is a 
library or an executable. 
In this example a manifest file saved as Foobar.exe.manifest is added to an 
application named Foobar.exe. Note the #1 for application.
    mt.exe -manifest "Foobar.exe.manifest" -outputresource:"Foobar.exe";#1
    In this example a manifest file saved as Foobar.dll.manifest is added to a class 
library named Foobar.dll. Note the #2 for a code library. 
    mt.exe -manifest "Foobar.dll.manifest" -outputresource:"Foobar.dll";#2
    Other Conciderations
By default the elevation dialog is an orange box. To turn this into a friendly 
blue dialog, the application needs to be code signed. See further reading for 
links to articles regarding this.
Elevation procedures surrounding installers are a bit too complex to go into 
detail here, however be warned that the requiresAdministrator flag on an MSI 
package does not actually provide full administrator permissions. This actually 
behaves slightly differently and runs as a subset of the full privileges unless 
you use a bootstrapper to gain full elevation. It's rare that installers would 
require these additional tokens as the installer's administrator permissions are 
generally sufficient.
Summary
To make an application UAC aware for Vista, a manifest file should be embedded 
into the executable or code library with the requestedExecutionLevel element. 
This prevents virtualization of data access requests and improves performance. 
It also ensures that application data intended for application scope is not 
limited to the current user scope. 
When referencing file system and registry data within the application/user 
scopes, ensure that the relevant environment variables are used to correctly 
locate the unprotected resources.
If your application requires access to protected resources then set the 
requestedExecutionLevel element to an appropriate value (other than asInvoker), 
and consider signing with an Authenticode certificate. This will ensure that the 
user is prompted to elevate the process, and ensure that the application has the 
required level of privileges to perform it’s tasks.
Further Reading
  Teach Your Apps To Play Nicely With Windows Vista User Account Control 
  UI Automation Security Overview 
  User Account Control Overview 
  The User Account Control WebLog 
  Registry Virtualization 
  Developer Best Practices and Guidelines for Applications in a Least Privileged 
  Environment 
  Using Authenticode Code Signing 
Labels: C# .Net, Vista 



1 comments: 
  Anonymous said... 
  Extremely helpful, thanks.
  04 November 2008 00:45  
Post a Comment 
Newer Post Older Post Home 
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Projects & Downloads
  .Net ActiveButtons Library 
  OutlookUnlocker - Unlock Blocked Attachments 
  SimpleUrl.Net Library 
  SqlHarvester Database Scripting Engine 
  XDMessaging .Net Library 
 Open Source Projects
  CodePlex 
 Sharepoint
  Sharepoint Gotchas 
 C# .Net
  .Net Cross AppDomain Communication 
  Adding caption buttons to the Non-client area on Vista 
  Making Your Application UAC Aware 
  One of the most useful yet little-known features to come out of C# 2.0 
  Outlook add-in to unlock blocked attachments in .Net 
  Programmatically setting control adapters for url rewriting & Ajax 
 Vista
  Adding caption buttons to the Non-client area on Vista 
  Making Your Application UAC Aware 
  Windows Vista Aero Glass in .Net Managed Win32 Applications 
 Blogger
  Hacks Part 1: Creating a static home page 
  Hacks Part 2: Creating a navigation structure 
 My Technology Blogs
  Development Tools 
  Recommended Free Software 
  Tricks & Tips 
 My Personal Links
  My Music 
  Google Lively 
    
 Keep the dream alive!
Feeling generous?
Why not buy some eternal gratitude?!
    
 
Copyright © 2008 
 