Using Rundll32.exe in Windows XP    
      Computer Education 
            Tips BlogWinXPInternetComputingDownloadsVista/7Home


            Using Rundll32.exe in Windows XP

      Although they are not directly executable as programs, the many DLL files 
      present in Windows contain libraries of functions that are used throughout 
      the operating system and in application software. Generally, these 
      functions are used internally by programs and are not directly visible to 
      the computer user. However, Windows contains a file rundll32.exe that 
      allows command line access to certain functions that are explicitly 
      written to be available to this executable file. In this article we 
      discuss how to use some of these and give examples for Windows XP. Windows 
      Vista and Windows 7 are discussed on another page.


            Syntax for using Rundll32.exe 
            The syntax for using Rundll32.exe must be followed precisely and is 
            as follows: 
            RUNDLL32.EXE <dllname>,<entrypoint> <optional arguments>

            The DLL name may not contain any spaces, commas or quotation marks. 
            If the DLL name does contain spaces, use the short (8.3) version of 
            the file name. Note that there must be a comma between the DLL name 
            and the entry point. Also, the name of the entry point function is 
            case-sensitive, and there can't be any spaces between the DLL name, 
            the comma, and the entry point function name. If the DLL file is not 
            in a folder contained in the system path environment, then the full 
            path must be used for the DLL name. See the Microsoft Knowledge Base 
            for more details.

      There are a number of commands employing Rundll32.exe that can be entered 
      into Start-Run, a command window, or used in scripts. A common use is to 
      open various Control Panel applets. (Another method specific to Control 
      Panel is discussed here.) For example, to open the Control Panel applet 
      for configuring the display properties enter 
      RUNDLL32.EXE SHELL32.DLL,Control_RunDLL desk.cpl,,0 
      Different tabs for the Desktop applet can be opened by changing the number 
      at the end that is part of the argument. All of the Control Panel applets 
      and their tabs can be opened this way by using the relevant CPL file and 
      the appropriate tab number as arguments. The operating system also uses 
      this method to display Control Panel. In fact, Control Panel applications 
      are the most commonly mentioned examples in discussions of using 
      Rundll32.exe. Examples of some different applications are discussed below. 

      Applications accessible by using Rundll32.exe
      Rundll32.exe is used internally by Windows for a variety of DLL functions 
      not exposed to the PC user but there are a number of DLLs that contain 
      entry points available for external use. The most useful of these DLLs is 
      shell32.dll. As illustrated above, this is the DLL that can be used to 
      open various Control Panel applets.
      Here are some lists of available commands (Note: some of the listed 
      commands are for Win98 and do not work in WinXP.)
        Dx21 Reference Guide (Had 244 instances when I last looked) 
        Vbexplorer.com 
        Media Chance Rundll FAQ 
        Rob van der Woude's site 
      The last site listed above has a discussion of the many options for 
      command line printer control using Rundll32.exe and printui.dll. The 
      discussion is for Windows 2000 Professional but seems to work the same on 
      my Windows XP Professional system. (I do not know if it applies to XP 
      Home.) If you open a command window and enter the line below an extensive 
      list of options will be shown. There are a variety of possible uses. 
      RUNDLL32 PRINTUI.DLL,PrintUIEntry /? 
      Another example is a command that allows you to switch the mouse-buttons 
      for left-hand use. Unfortunately, once the switch is made it seems that it 
      can only be undone by the old-fashioned method of going to Control Panel. 
      In other words, it doesn't act as a toggle but seems to be one way. The 
      command is 
      RUNDLL32.EXE USER32.DLL,SwapMouseButton 
      If you need to switch the button settings back and forth, the command 
      given below will take you to the mouse settings dialog
      RUNDLL32.EXE SHELL32.dll,Control_RunDLL main.cpl @0,0 
      A further example is a command that brings up the "Open with.." dialog box 
      for a particular file myfile.ext given as an argument. The full path for 
      myfile.ext must be used unless its folder is in the path environment. 
      RUNDLL32.EXE SHELL32.DLL,OpenAs_RunDLL <myfile.ext> 
      An Internet Explorer application that will clear out the branding that 
      some ISPs like AOL stick into the IE title bar is 
      RUNDLL32.EXE IEdkcs32.dll,Clear 
      The Safely Remove Hardware icon that is displayed in the notification area 
      (also called the System Tray) when USB devices are attached can sometimes 
      fail to appear. The utility can be opened by a command
      RUNDLL32.EXE SHELL32.DLL,Control_RunDLL HotPlug.dll 
      The foregoing examples are a only a few of those listed in the references 
      given above. Depending on their pattern of usage and level of computer 
      expertise, PC users may find a variety of others that they are of 
      interest. 
      Making shortcuts using Rundll32.exe
      Many of the commands using Rundll32.exe are more likely to be found in 
      scripts rather than in shortcuts for everyday use. However, creating a 
      shortcut using one of the commands is very easy. Right-click in an empty 
      spot in the folder where you want the shortcut to be located and choose 
      New-Shortcut from the context menu. Enter the desired command in the line 
      "Type the location of the item." Click "Next," choose a name, and click 
      "Finish."
      A shortcut that I personally like opens the dialog box for editing the 
      Favorites in Internet Explorer. The command is
      RUNDLL32.EXE shdocvw.dll,DoOrganizeFavDlg
      In Windows 98/Me two of the most commonly used shortcuts using 
      Rundll32.exe allowed for a quick computer shutdown or for an easy reboot. 
      These do not work in Windows XP. A different method is available using the 
      file shutdown.exe. However, to put your computer into hibernation mode 
      (assuming your power management supports this) the command for a shortcut 
      is
      RUNDLL32.EXE PowrProf.dll,SetSuspendState
      Error messages involving Rundll32.Exe
      Since Rundll32.exe is involved with many processes in Windows, it isn't 
      uncommon that error messages crop up that include references to it. That 
      does not mean that Rundll32.exe is itself the actual culprit. More often 
      than not the problem lies elsewhere, such as the DLL file that is being 
      called. Persistent error messages may also indicate infection by a virus 
      or a spyware or Trojan problem. Regular scans with an anti-virus and 
      spyware removal software with updated definitions should be made. There 
      are too many possible reasons for error messages to be discussed here but 
      H. Leboeuf has a Web page with a large catalog of articles from the 
      Microsoft Knowledge Base that are about Rundll32.exe error messages. 
      Determining which modules are being executed by Rundll.32.exe
      The Windows XP tool Tasklist can be used to determine what program modules 
      are currently being executed by rundll32.exe. (For discussion of Tasklist, 
      go to this page.) To create a list of running tasks, open a Command Prompt 
      window and enter the following command:
      tasklist /m /fi "IMAGENAME eq rundll32.exe" >C:\rundll32.txt
      This will create a text file rundll32.txt on the C: drive that lists the 
      running modules. If you prefer a different location for the text file, 
      modify the command accordingly. Also, to simply view the running tasks in 
      the command window, omit the part of the command that does file 
      redirection, >C:\rundll32.txt. 
      Difference between Rundll32.exe and Rundll.exe
      Note that Windows 9X/Me still had some 16-bit operating system files so a 
      16-bit relative of rundll32.exe called rundll.exe was also present in the 
      older versions of Windows. Windows XP is a pure 32-bit system and 
      rundll.exe is not present. 
      Windows Vista and Windows 7
      Some examples of commands that can be used with rundll32.exe in Windows 
      Vista and Windows 7 are given on another page.
       


       < Main page ©2002-2010 Victor Laurie    This page last updated on: 
      08/23/2010 09:20:06 Top page  > 
