BEYOND ACCESSIBLE VOTING

This document contains information and a series of steps taken by the Monroe County chapter of the Pennsylvania Council of the Blind (PCB) in response to the voting experiences of the visually impaired and blind in the fall of 2006.

This document is not intended to serve as step-by-step instructions.  Rather, we hope it will provide ideas and possibilities for individual PCB chapters to use in developing their own plan to improve the voting experience locally.

BACKGROUND:

In response to the Help America Vote Act (HAVA), the Monroe County Office of Elections in Northeast Pennsylvania installed the Danaher Voting Machine.  This offered several accessible features such as a hand held audible component and large print text for the visually impaired and adjustable height to accommodate persons using wheelchairs.

After the November 2006 election, members of the Monroe County Council of the Blind (MCCB) reported similar experiences in varying polling locations.  Each was discouraged from using the audio accessibility component of the Danaher machine.  In just about all instances, members reported poll workers explaining that the process would take 45 minutes.

MCCB reacted to what appeared to be a systematic approach to dissuading visually impaired and blind voters from independently casting a vote.  A letter was composed and sent both to the local paper and to the County Commissioners office. In addition to detailing the experiences of several members, MCCB requested an appointment to discuss how the voting process could be made more friendly, dignified and accessible to blind and visually impaired voters.

As a direct result of the letter, MCCB's Advocacy Chairperson and President Were offered the opportunity to meet with the Director of Voter Registration to discuss how best to improve the voting process for blind and visually impaired voters around the county.  Below are the suggestions we made and the corresponding solutions thereafter implemented.

MCCB PROPOSED SOLUTIONS:
1.                  Sensitivity Training for all election officials

We offered to meet with both Election Judges and Poll Workers and as a result, we were invited to each training required by the county for these officials.  The council presented just a ten minute training regarding such topics as sighted guide technique, addressing the blind or visually impaired voter rather than his/her sighted companion and directing the visually impaired voter to sign their log book.  Much of our success can be attributed to the fact that we personalized the process by meeting with election officials.
Much can be said for introducing personalities to the situation.

2.                  ACCESS TO VOTING MACHINE ACCESSIBILITY FEATURE IN ADVANCE OF THE ELECTION

One of the deterrents to using the access feature is the unfamiliarity many have with using technology. As a way to educate the community we suggested multiple opportunities for individuals to use the machine in advance of the election.

The machine was brought to a monthly MCCB meeting and was available in the office of the Commissioners for a considerable period of time prior to the next election.

3.                   ACCESSIBLE INFORMATION – INSTRUCTIONS AND BALLOT

A. 2007

In 2007, the county provided links on their web site to .mp3 audio files containing both instructions for use of the accessibility component of the Danaher Voting Machine along with audio ballots for each specific municipality within the county.

B. 2008

In advance of the Primary election scheduled for April 22, 2008, the Monroe County Audio Ballot System was implemented.  Through this system, a person may easily listen to the specific ballot for their own municipality by utilizing the numbers on the keypad of their telephone, thereby being better prepared prior to voting.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

How can you succeed in your own County?

1.  Assess the problems which blind or visually impaired persons have had at the polling place;

2.  Learn who is responsible for voting issues in your county by contacting your County Commissioner's Office;

3.  Ascertain which voting machine is being used and what-type of accessible features are contained within that machine;

4.  Request an appointment with Commissioners or other person in charge of voting issues;

5.  Based on the concerns reported to you by blind or visually impaired voters in the county, prepare a list of suggestions to present during your appointment to improve the experience for that population;

6.  Ask to be allowed to attend training for election officials so as to provide practical advice regarding how to appropriately react to a blind or visually impaired voter when he or she enters the polling place;

7.  Invite a representative from the Commissioner's Office to your chapter's monthly meeting to demonstrate the machine if possible and if the machine does not have sufficient portability to allow for this, and as an additional supportive measure, request that the machine and an election official versed in the accessible features of the machine be made available to blind and visually impaired persons in advance of the election for practice purposes;

8.  Contact various transportation providers in your county, i.e. Transit Authority, RSVP, VIABL or other agency of or for the blind to ascertain to what extent they are able to assist in providing transportation for voters on election day and prior to practice with the particular machine in your county;

9.  With regard to transportation on Election Day, voters who are registered to a particular party may find assistance by contacting representatives of that party who may be willing to provide transportation to the polling place.

10.  Don't stop there; urge your members and others in the county to vote independently. Visit local blindness organizations, senior centers and conduct voter registration drives.


